          COMP1531
Software Engineering Fundamentals

                  Week 4
      Development - Advanced Functions
Lecture Objective:

● Explore powerful ways higher-level languages use functions
● Learn function syntax and structure
● Explore first-class and higher-order functions
● Understand the role and use of callbacks
   Function Syntax
                  In Javascript there are three equivalent ways to define functions.


 Method 1                                Method 2                                 Method 3




fn_syntax_1.js                           fn_syntax_2.js                          fn_syntax_3.js



          ●      Method 1 is the old school method. Though it's fine :)
          ●      Method 2 and 3 are similar, treating functions like variables.
          ●      Method 3 is more modern and has other advantages.
   Function Syntax
                  In Javascript there are three equivalent ways to define functions.

 Method 1                                Method 2                                 Method 3




fn_syntax_1.ts                           fn_syntax_2.ts                          fn_syntax_3.ts



          ●      Method 1 is the old school method. Though it's fine :)
          ●      Method 2 and 3 are similar, treating functions like variables.
          ●      Method 3 is more modern and has other advantages.
Function Syntax
Method 3 also has another advantage. IFF (If and only if) the function body is a single line
   body that simply returns a value, the braces { } and return keyword can be omitted.



     Method 3                                    Method 3 Compact




    fn_syntax_3.ts                                       fn_syntax_3_compact.ts
Function Syntax
       Another example: You might have previously written this function like this:



Many String                                         Many String - Advanced




 many_string_1.ts                                             many_string_3.ts
First Class Functions

In JavaScript, functions are treated like variables → can be stored, passed, or returned. (This is a
language feature.)
First Class Functions

You're already used to the idea that you can write a function that produces a
different output based on the variable inputted.




                              fcf_var.ts
First Class Functions
So let's expand that idea and say we can write a function that produces a different output based on a function that
          is inputted. We essentially pass the function object in, and then call the function inside the body




                                   fcf_format_atomic_alt.ts
First Class Functions - Anonymous Functions
      If we only intend to use a function once, we can pass it directly into a function.
      Because this function doesn't have a name, we call it an anonymous function.




      fcf_format_loop_new.ts                                           fcf_format_loop_anon.ts
First-Class Functions

🧠 In Summary: What

 ●   First-class functions mean functions are treated like variables.
 ●   They can be passed as arguments, returned, or stored.
 ●   This enables functions to accept other functions as inputs.

💡 Why ?

 ●   Enables concise and readable code.
 ●   Supports anonymous (one-off) functions for cleaner logic.
 ●   Forms the foundation for callbacks, higher-order functions, and functional programming.
Map, Reduce, Filter

Map, reduce, filter are functions that act on array objects that help us accomplish
basic iterative tasks without the overhead of a loop setup. They are based on
ideas of firstclass functions and anonymous functions

●   Map: Modify an array
●   Filter: Select from an array
●   Reduce: Summarise an array
Map, Reduce, Filter

Map

●     Takes an array of size N, and produces a new array of size N having modified
      each element according to a function passed in.
●     Same array size. Modified elements.
Map, Reduce, Filter
Map
          Classic                                         Modern




             map_old.ts                                     map.ts

                    Same array size. Modified elements.
Map, Reduce, Filter

Filter

●   Takes an array of size N, and produces a new array of size 0..N without
    modifying any of the data.
●   Possibly smaller array size. Elements unchanged.
Map, Reduce, Filter
Filter
          Classic                                                           Modern




                                                                               filter.ts




         filter_old.ts
                         Possibly smaller array size. Elements unchanged.
Map, Reduce, Filter

Reduce

●   Executes a reducer function (that you provide) on each member of the array
    resulting in a single output value.
●   Array turned into atomic value.
Map, Reduce, Filter
Reduce                                                     Modern
          Classic




         reduce_old.ts
                                                            reduce.ts
                         Array turned into atomic value.
Map, Reduce, Filter - Anonymous Functions
We can use anonymous functions to further streamline our previous code.




                             map_stream.ts




                             filter_stream.ts




                               reduce_stream.ts
Map, Reduce, Filter - Combined Example




                 map_reduce_filter_demo.ts
Higher Order Functions

●   Higher-order Functions are essentially functions that return functions. Think of
    them like mini function factories.
●   Let's go through a code cleanup journey.
Higher Order Functions - Another Example




          hoc_1.ts




                                           hoc_7.ts
Higher Order Functions

Summary

●   Higher order functions are syntactically sleek ways to generalise function
    definitions.
●   It make code reusable, flexible, and expressive, allowing developers to
    write cleaner, modular, and more powerful JavaScript programs.
Feedback
